Question 1 of 10 (Original Question #11)

A physician is meeting with a group of fellows for their weekly research symposium, and the topic of
discussion is reliability and validity. They discuss a scenario regarding a hospital that is testing a new
depression screening tool. One of the goals is to compare the use of a tool between residents and attending
physicians, and evaluate the degree to which the 2 groups independently score patients positive for
depression. 
Of the following, this scenario refers to the research concept of
A.content validity
B.internal consistency reliability
C.inter-rater reliability 
D.predictive validity

Correct Answer: inter-rater reliability

PREP Pearl(s):
Reliability is the consistency (repeatability) of scores (eg, you get the same temperature measurement
with repeated tests).
Validity  describes whether a test or instrument actually measures what is intended (eg, a temporal
thermometer measures the core body temperature).

Critique:
The vignette example involves inter-rater reliability, one of several types of reliability measures. When
evaluating the generalizability or impact of a test or instrument, it is important to understand the concepts of
reliability and validity. Reliability  is the consistency (repeatability) of scores (eg, you get the same
temperature measurement with repeated tests of a thermometer). Validity  describes whether a test or
instrument actually measures what is intended (eg, a temporal thermometer accurately measures core body
temperature).
Three aspects of reliability should be considered: test-retest, internal consistency, and inter-rater reliability:
Test-retest reliability  assesses if a test/instrument yields the same results each time when used with
the same study population under the same study conditions (temporal thermometer reading is the
same, even when temperature is taken sequentially within minutes). There is a high test-retest
reliability when the scores are similar on each administration.
Internal consistency reliability measures the consistency of items within a test. For example, some
tests/instruments are composed of several subtests, combined into a composite score. Internal
consistency occurs when each of those items correlate to the overall composite score. Two methods to
measure internal consistency include the Kuder-Richardson 20 and the Cronbach alpha. An alpha of
0.80 or higher is an indicator of high internal consistency.8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 23/99
Inter-rater reliability measures the degree to which 2 separate raters independently rate an
observation similarly (same temperature reading between the nurse and the doctor using the same
instrument). Time lapse and multiple raters threaten this type of reliability measure. 
There are 2 major types of validity: content and criterion, each having subtypes within them:
Content validity refers to the degree with which a particular construct is represented by the items
that make up an instrument/test. There are 2 types of content validity: face and sampling. 
Face validity refers to whether the elements of an instrument/test make intuitive sense. 
Sampling validity refers to whether all the aspects to be studied are included in the
instrument. 
Criterion validity is the degree in which the measurement correlates with an external criterion or
instrument/test that is considered valid. The types of criterion validity include convergent, predictive,
and discriminant validity. 
Convergent validity assesses the degree to which independent measures of the same
construct are correlated.
Predictive validity is the ability of an instrument/test to predict some future criterion. 
Discriminant validity is present when an instrument/test shows little or no correlation with a
measure from which it differs. 
Several types of reliability and validity should be evaluated when considering a particular instrument/test. 
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Ho PM, Peterson PN, Masoudi FA. Evaluating the evidence: is there a rigid hierarchy? Circulation .
2008;118:1675-1684. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.721357
Perry-Parrish C, Dodge R. Research and statistics: validity hierarchy for study design and study type.
Pediatr Rev . 2010;31(1):27-29. doi: 10.1542/pir.31-1-27
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: inter-rater reliability


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 2 of 10 (Original Question #12)

A hospitalist works at a large, urban hospital that serves a diverse pediatric patient population with a high
burden of severe asthma and atopic disease. For an upcoming journal club, the hospitalist division will review
a recently published randomized controlled trial. The trial concludes that a new medication for asthma
exacerbations, “BtrBreth,” improves asthma symptoms and decreases length of hospital stay as compared to
standard asthma therapy. The study was a randomized controlled trial conducted at 20 small pediatric
hospitals in rural England with a total sample size of 1,500 patients. The researchers included children with
intermittent asthma admitted for an asthma exacerbation and excluded any with persistent asthma,
allergies, eczema, or other comorbidities.
Of the following, the application of this study to the hospitalist’s patients is MOST limited by a lack of
A.causality
B.generalizability 
C.internal validity
D.power

Correct Answer: generalizability

PREP Pearl(s):
Generalizability (external validity) is the degree to which a research study’s results can be applied to
other populations and settings.
Internal validity evaluates the causal relationship of variables in a particular research study.

Critique:
Generalizability, also known as external validity, is the application of study conclusions to individuals and
circumstances beyond those studied. External validity is the extent to which one can generalize the findings
of a study to other situations, people, settings, and measures. A study is considered generalizable if the
characteristics and implications of the results may be applied to individuals other than those sampled and
across different times and settings. In this case, a new asthma medication, “BtrBreth,” was studied in
pediatric patients with intermittent asthma admitted with an asthma exacerbation at 20 small hospitals in
England. Though the results appear promising, the findings are likely not generalizable to the hospitalist
group’s patients, who live in an urban setting and have varying levels of asthma severity. Generalizability is an
important concept for hospitalists to assess while evaluating research results and applying these to their own
patient populations. 
Internal validity is defined as the extent to which the observed results represent the truth in the population
we are studying and, thus, are not due to methodological errors. A study has high internal validity if there is a
high degree of confidence in the cause and effect result of a relationship between variables. Confounding,
when a third variable distorts the true relationship between the exposure and outcome variables, is limited8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 25/99
when internal validity is high. Randomization allows the treatment and control groups to have similar
demographics and therefore limits confounding. In the case above, there is high internal validity. BtrBreth
was evaluated in a randomized controlled trial with strict inclusion and exclusion criteria in one particular
setting. One may confidently conclude that BtrBreth improves outcome measures for intermittent asthmatics
hospitalized with an asthma exacerbation more than current standard management. However, achieving
high internal validity may come at the expense of generalizability; patients in the treatment and control
groups may be similar to each other but quite different from patients elsewhere. The study with BtrBreth has
high internal validity but low generalizability.
It is optimal to seek a balance between internal validity and generalizability. To achieve this, researchers try
to increase the heterogeneity of the sampled population. This may be accomplished by using random
sampling, which reduces bias in the study and therefore, improves generalizability. Another step to improve
generalizability is to broaden eligibility criteria of the study population. However, while improving
generalizability, broadening eligibility criteria may decrease internal validity and feasibility of the study.
Conducting a study across multiple settings, inpatient and outpatient settings for example, may increase
generalizability. 
Causality and power do not limit the applicability of this study. Causality is the relationship of the
independent variable’s effect on the dependent variable. In this case, does BtrBreth affect asthma outcomes?
If done with appropriate randomization and blinding, this randomized controlled trial demonstrated that it
does. Power represents the likelihood that a study will detect an effect or have a significant result if such an
effect exists in the population being studied. In statistical terms, power is the probability that a test will reject
a false null hypothesis (ie, that it will not make a type II error). When other factors are equal, studies with
larger sample sizes, like this study, have greater statistical power. 
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Crowne SS. Research and statistics: generalizability and how it relates to validity. Pediatr Rev .
2010;31(8):335-336. doi: 
Steckler A, Mcleroy KR. The importance of external validity. American Journal of Public Health .
2008;98(1):9-10. doi: 10.2105/ajph.2007.126847
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: generalizability


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 3 of 10 (Original Question #21)

Investigators in a recent study assessed admission rates for acute croup. They hypothesized that there would
be a significant difference in admission rates among children who received one treatment with nebulized
epinephrine compared with children who received multiple treatments of nebulized epinephrine. They
sought to detect a difference of 20% in admission rates with a predefined α  of .05 and 80% power to reach
statistical significance. Using a large inpatient database, they identified 80,000 children who received one
dose of nebulized epinephrine and 8,000 children who received more than one dose of nebulized
epinephrine for acute croup. Admission rates were 10% in the former group and 70% in the latter group ( P
=.01). 
Of the following, the statement that BEST reflects the results of this study is
A.multiple doses of epinephrine is a leading cause of admission for croup
B.the null hypothesis regarding difference in admission rates should be rejected 
C.the odds of admission were 7 times higher with multiple doses of epinephrine
D.the study was underpowered to find a significant difference between the groups

Correct Answer: the null hypothesis regarding difference in admission rates should be rejected

PREP Pearl(s):
The P value is the probability that an outcome at least as extreme is observed if the null hypothesis is
true.
Obtaining a result with a  P value of less than α  = 0.05 (5%) does not guarantee that the null hypothesis
is wrong, since a type I error (or false positive error) may still have occurred.
P values do not provide any information about the effect size of the results.

Critique:
The null hypothesis of this study is that there is no difference in admission rates for children with croup who
received one treatment with nebulized epinephrine compared with children who received multiple doses of
epinephrine. Given that the P value for the difference in admission rates was P =.01, the null hypothesis
should be rejected in favor of the alternative hypothesis (ie, there is a true difference between the two
groups).
Retrospective studies such as this, while suggesting an association between multiple doses of inhaled
epinephrine and admission, cannot establish causation. Odds ratios are calculated by calculating the cross
product ratio of a 2 ✕  2 table; in this instance, the odds ratio is 21. Lastly, given the large patient sample and
the P value of .01, the study appears to be adequately powered to find a significant difference. If no
significant difference was detected, one might suspect that a type II error (or false negative error) has
occurred, as a result of lack of power.8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 45/99
The P value is the probability that an outcome at least as extreme is observed if the null hypothesis is true.
Typically, the significance level, or α , for a statistical test is set at .05. Alpha levels are determined by the
investigators at the beginning of the study, whereas P values are calculated from the data. Obtaining a result
with a P value of less than .05 (5%) does not guarantee that the null hypothesis is wrong, since a type I error
(or false positive error) may still have occurred. In addition, P values should also not be interpreted as the
probability that a hypothesis is true; in this example, it would be incorrect to state that the hypothesis was
99.99% likely to be true. Finally, although P values may help a clinician decide whether to accept or reject a
hypothesis, they do not provide any measure of effect size to help with clinical decision making.
The power of a study is the probability of finding a difference that does exist or that the null hypothesis will
be rejected. A study’s power can be increased by increasing the sample size, the effect size, or the α .
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Greenland S, Senn SJ, Rothman KJ, et al. Statistical tests, P values, confidence intervals, and power: a
guide to misinterpretations. Eur J Epidemiol.  2016;31(4):337-350. doi:10.1007/s10654-016-0149-3.
Youngquist ST. Part 19: what is a P value? Air Med J.  2012; 31(2): 56-71. doi:10.1016/j.amj.2011.12.007.
Elmore JG, Wild DMG, Nelson HD, Katz DL. Jekel’s Epidemiology, Biostatistics, Preventive Medicine, and
Public Health. 5th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2020: chap 9:132.
Content D om ain
Statistics
Learning O bjectives
Interpret a p-value
The correct answer is: the null hypothesis regarding difference in admission rates should be rejected


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 4 of 10 (Original Question #17)

A clinical randomized controlled trial is performed to test the efficacy of a new type of corticosteroid inhaler
as compared with “usual care” in preventing exacerbations of asthma in children. Enough patients are
enrolled to provide a statistical power of 70%. Asthma severity, as measured by means of a validated score,
was reduced by 35% in the intervention group and by 28% in the usual care group (p = .13). Using the
common criterion of p < .05 as the cutoff point for significance, the authors conclude that there is no
statistical difference between intervention and control groups.
Of the following, the BEST estimate of the probability that the authors have reached their conclusion in error
is
A.5%
B.7%
C.13%
D.30% 

Correct Answer: 30%

PREP Pearl(s):
The maximum probability of a type I error (inappropriately rejecting the null hypothesis) is determined
by the level of significance chosen for the hypothesis test ( α , usually .05).
The likelihood of type II error (inappropriately failing to reject the null hypothesis) is determined by the
power of the hypothesis test (power = 1 − β ).
Increasing sample size is one way to decrease the likelihood of type II error.

Critique:
The power of a study is the study’s ability to detect a predetermined difference between 2 groups when one
truly exists. If the authors in this study have reached their conclusion in error, they have committed a type II
error in failing to reject the null hypothesis. The probability of type II error is β , determined by the power of
the test (1 − β ), which in this study is 70%. Because 1 − β  = 0.7, β  = 0.3 or 30% is the correct response.
Researchers can often reduce type II error and increase the power of a study by increasing the sample size
(Table ).
The authors of this study sought to assess whether a new technology would provide superior control of
childhood asthma as compared with usual care. To perform this assessment, they must use the available
data to test their hypothesis, using appropriate hypothesis testing. In this case, the null hypothesis (a
statement of “no effect” or “no difference”) is that the new inhaler technology provides the same benefit as
usual care. The alternative hypothesis states that the new inhaler technology differs from usual care. This
may be stated in 1 of 2 ways: (1) the test technology provides improvement  over usual care (a one-tailed
hypothesis), or (2) the test technology is not equivalent  to usual care (a 2-tailed hypothesis, recognizing that8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 36/99
the test technology could be either better or worse than usual care). In either case, the authors here
determined that the null hypothesis could not be rejected because the reported p-value did not achieve the
predetermined level of statistical significance of p < .05. 
Hypothesis testing
On the basis of sample data, a hypothesis test is used to determine whether the data support rejecting or not
rejecting the null hypothesis. Depending on the type of data collected, a variety of statistical tests may be
used to test the hypothesis of interest. Typically, these hypothesis tests report the calculated probability or
“p-value,” which is used to make the determination. A cut-point is chosen ahead of time to define the p-value
below which the null hypothesis is rejected. Most commonly, a p-value cutoff of .05 is used in scientific
research. This is the maximum probability of making a type I error (null hypothesis rejected when it is true)
that the researchers are willing to accept.
Type I error
A type I error is made when the null hypothesis is in fact true but is rejected. The likelihood of this error is α ,
which is the level of significance chosen for the hypothesis test (typically, .05). If a higher α  is used, there is a
greater likelihood of type I error. If a lower α  is used, it may be more difficult to detect a true difference.
Type II error
When the null hypothesis is in fact false but is not rejected, a type II error is made. The likelihood of
committing a type II error is β , which is determined by the power of the test. When one increases the power
(often by increasing the sample size), one decreases the chance of committing a type II error.
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Guyatt G, Rennie D. Users' Guides to the Medical Literature: A Manual for Evidence-based Clinical practice .
AMA Press; 2002.
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: 30%


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 5 of 10 (Original Question #13)

A new drug is being studied for the treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. It is a formulation of budesonide in
individual pouches with a ready-made viscous solution that eliminates the need for the patient or parent to
mix budesonide liquid vials before ingestion. The study randomized 50 children between the ages of 4 and
14 years with eosinophilic esophagitis into 2 groups of medical therapies. They compared the results of
esophageal biopsies from the diagnostic endoscopy to a subsequent endoscopy after 3 to 5 months on
either formulation of budesonide. The study failed to find a significant difference in the number of
eosinophils per HPF in those who used the new drug compound compared with those who used the
budesonide vials mixed with a sucralose-based artificial sweetener.
Of the following, the MOST accurate statement regarding this study is that
A.the alternative hypothesis is supported
B.it is possible that a type I error was committed
C.it is possible that a type II error was committed 
D.the null hypothesis is rejected

Correct Answer: it is possible that a type II error was committed

PREP Pearl(s):
A type II error (the probability of which is known as β ) occurs when the study fails to reject the null
hypothesis when there is indeed a difference between the two study groups.
A type I error (the probability of which is known as α ) incorrectly rejects the null hypothesis.
The power of a study is equal to 1 − β . The higher the power, the lower the possibility of a type II error,
and although achieving a power to 100% would eliminate a type II error, this is nearly impossible in
most studies. Acceptable values for β  are usually set at 0.2 or less, making the power set at 0.8 or
higher.

Critique:
The null hypothesis (H ) of a study states that there is no difference between the two study groups, whereas
the researchers’ hypothesis hopes to find a difference between the two study groups (also known as
alternative hypothesis). In this particular study, no difference was found between the two groups; therefore,
the alternative hypothesis was not supported and the null hypothesis was not rejected.
While testing the null hypothesis, 2 primary types of errors may occur: type I error (the probability of which is
known as α ) and type II error (the probability of which is known as β ). A type I error incorrectly rejects the null
hypothesis. This means that the study has determined a difference between the two study groups when in
reality, there is no difference between the groups. Because the null hypothesis was not rejected in this
particular study, a type I error was not possible, making this choice incorrect.08/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 27/99
A type II error occurs when the study fails to reject the null hypothesis when there is indeed a difference
between the two study groups. Because this study cited no difference between the two study groups and
therefore failed to reject the null hypothesis, the study result is either true or a type II error was committed
(see chart below).
  Research: fails to reject H Research: rejects the H
Reality: H  is true CORRECT Type I error
Reality: H  is false Type II error CORRECT
For a given sample size, type I and type II errors have an inverse relationship, meaning that the probability of
a type I error increases if the risk of a type II error is minimized and vice versa. 
The power of a study is equal to 1 − β . Power, therefore, is the probability of correctly rejecting the null
hypothesis when it is false and detecting a difference between the two groups when there truly is a
difference. The higher the power, the lower the possibility of a type II error, and although achieving a power
to 100% would eliminate a type II error, this is nearly impossible in most studies. Acceptable values for β  are
usually set at 0.2 or less, making the power set at 0.8 or higher. As the power increases, the risk for a type I
error also increases and acceptable values of α  are often set at 0.05. This means that the probability of a type
I error is at most 5% in the study.
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Hazra A, Gogtay N. Biostatistics series module 2: overview of hypothesis testing. Indian J Dermatol.
2016;61(2):137-145. doi: 10.4103/0019-5154.177775
Motulsky HJ, ed. P values and statistical hypothesis testing. In: Prism 4 Statistics Guide: Statistical Analysis
for Laboratory and Clinical Researchers.  GraphPad Software Inc; 2005:16-19.
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: it is possible that a type II error was committed


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 6 of 10 (Original Question #28)

A pediatric nephrologist is studying factors that affect phosphorus levels in children with end-stage renal
disease (ESRD). The nephrologist has collected laboratory data on all children with ESRD over a 5-year period
from 6 dialysis centers serving a large, urban, diverse community. Fifty percent of the children were identified
as Hispanic, 30% as African-American, 10% as white, and 10% did not have race/ethnicity information
available. 
Of the following, the BEST statistical approach to determine whether mean serum phosphorus levels differ
by race/ethnicity in children with ESRD in this cohort is
A.analysis of variance 
B.Chi-square
C.linear regression
D.paired sample t test

Correct Answer: analysis of variance

PREP Pearl(s):
In general, variables can be categorical (eg, male, female) or continuous (eg, age, serum phosphorus).
Categorical variables can be dichotomous (eg, vaccinated or unvaccinated) or fall into more than two
categories (eg, race/ethnicity). 
An analysis of variance is the best option for comparing mean values of more than 2 groups, assuming
that the data are normally distributed. When normal distribution is not present, it is generally better to
use the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis test to compare medians of the groups. 
The t test and analysis of variance are used when the mean of a continuous variable is being compared
between groups. A t test is used to compare 2 groups (eg, the mean age of 2 different groups). A paired
t test is used when the measured outcome is assessed twice in the same group (eg, pre- and post-
treatment). An independent t test is used when two groups are being compared on a single measured
outcome (eg, adult height in children with and without a history of childhood chronic kidney disease).

Critique:
The pediatric nephrologist wants to know whether mean serum phosphorus levels differ by race/ethnicity,
which includes more than 2 mutually exclusive categories. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) is the best option
for comparing mean values of more than 2 groups, assuming that the data are normally distributed. 
The choice of the most appropriate statistical test to use depends on characteristics of the variables ( Table ).
In general, variables can be categorical (eg, male, female) or continuous (eg, age, serum phosphorus).
Categorical variables can be dichotomous (eg, vaccinated or unvaccinated) or fall into more than 2 categories
(eg, race/ethnicity). In this case, we are considering a quantitative continuous variable, serum phosphorus.
There are 3 main types of statistical analysis: 8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 61/99
1) descriptive (eg, mean age in one population) 
2) comparative (eg, t test, ANOVA, Chi square) 
3) measure associations between variables (eg, linear regression, Pearson correlation)
It is important to remember that statistical associations do not prove causality. The t test and ANOVA are
used when the mean of a continuous variable is being compared between groups (as in the vignette). A t test
is used to compare 2 groups (eg, the mean age of 2 different groups). A paired t test is used when the
measured outcome is assessed twice in the same group (eg, pre- and post-treatment). An independent t test
is used when 2 groups are being compared on a single measured outcome (eg, adult height in children with
and without a history of childhood chronic kidney disease). A Chi square ( χ 2) statistic is used to investigate
whether the distribution of categorical variables differs between groups (eg, examining risk of influenza
infection [yes/no] in children who were vaccinated versus unvaccinated).
If the data for the outcome variable is skewed (as is the case with many biological system variables), choosing
a nonparametric test may be most appropriate. In the case of multiple group comparisons, the Kruskal–
Wallis test is typically used. With very large sample sizes, the P values provided by parametric and
nonparametric values are often very similar, even for data which do not have a normal distribution.
Statistical tests for testing associations depend on characteristics of the variables, including the number of
groups in each variable to be compared, whether subjects in the variable groups are matched, and how the
outcome variable being compared between the 2 groups is measured. A Pearson’s correlation is a
measurement of the linear association between 2 continuous variables and cannot be used for categorical
variables, such as race/ethnicity. A regression analysis can be performed using both categorical and
quantitative variables and allows for testing for association of multiple variables with an outcome (eg, age,
sex, and race/ethnicity with mean serum phosphorus level). 
The null hypothesis of the ANOVA is that 2 or more groups have the same mean. ANOVA uses the F statistic,
which represents the amount of variability between samples versus the overall variability of all samples.
F = between the group variability/within group variability; between the group variability is calculated by taking
the sum of the square difference in the mean of each group minus the overall mean of all the data, times the
number of observations, divided by number of groups minus 1: 
,
where Y  is the sample mean in the i  group, n  is the number of observations in the i  group, Y is the overall
mean of the data, and K is the number of groups.
Within-group variability is calculated by taking the sum of the square difference of measured values in the
group, divided by the sample size minus the number of groups:
where Y is the j observation in the i out of K groups, and N is the overall sample size. 
Just as with the t test, there is a chart of values for the F test with critical F statistics that indicate when the
null hypothesis is rejected. This varies depending upon the “degrees of freedom,” which is calculated as
total df = n - 1, where n is the total number of observations, 
between groups df = number of groups - 1, 
and within-groups df = total df - between-groups df, for a one-way ANOVA.
In general, statistical software is used to perform ANOVA analyses. A 2-way ANOVA is also possible, and
allows one to test whether the means that differ between groups are different when the groups are divided
by 2 different characteristics (eg, male/female and race/ethnicity).ithith
ijthth8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 62/99
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Bewick V, Cheek Liz, Ball J. Statistics review 9: one-way analysis of variance. Crit Care . 2004;8(2):130-136.
doi:10.1186/cc2836.
Campbell MJ, Machin D, Walters SJ. Medical Statistics: A Textbook for the Health Sciences. Wiley-Blackwell;
2007.
Madsen BS. Statistics for Non-Statisticians.  Springer; 2011.
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: analysis of variance


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 7 of 10 (Original Question #34)

A pediatric hospitalist is interested in studying asthma readmissions in her hospital. The hospital admits a
large number of patients with asthma. She wants to compare the proportion of asthma readmissions in
patients discharged with an asthma action plan compared to asthma patients who are discharged without an
asthma action plan.
Of the following, the MOST appropriate statistical test for this study is
A.analysis of variance
B.chi-square test 
C.McNemar test
D.paired t test

Correct Answer: chi-square test

PREP Pearl(s):
Choosing an appropriate statistical method depends on the research question, study design, type of
variables, and the structure of the data.
Categorical variables are variables that have 2 or more groups.
A chi-square test is used to compare unpaired  samples with categorical  variables.

Critique:
Quantitative statistical methods can be (a) descriptive or (b) inferential. Descriptive statistics organize the
data/information in measures of central tendency and measures of variability/spread. Inferential statistics
involve drawing predictions/inferences about a population from the data of a sample of the population. The
important steps involved in statistical testing include (a) stating the research question, (b) formulating the null
and alternative hypotheses, (c) selecting the appropriate statistical test, (d) specifying the level of significance
(ie, 0.05), (e) analyzing statistical test results, (f) accepting or rejecting the null hypothesis, and (g) interpreting
the test result.
Choosing an appropriate statistical method depends on the research question, study design, type of
variables, and the structure of the data. Variables are individual characteristics that have different values.
Examples of variables include height, body mass index, and blood pressure. Variables can be dependent or
independent, categorical, or continuous. Categorical variables are variables that have 2 or more groups.
Categorical variables can be dichotomous (eg, dead/alive), nominal (eg, race), or ordinal (eg, severity of pain).
Continuous variables are variables that can have an infinite number of values between any 2 intervals (eg,
weight). The design of a study can be paired or unpaired. A paired design uses data from the same test
subjects at different points of time (eg, before and after treatment), while an unpaired study design uses data
from different test subjects.8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 76/99
For comparison of groups for categorical  endpoints, the following statistical methods are used. For the
comparison of proportions between unpaired  samples with categorical variables, Fisher exact or chi-square
tests are used. Fisher exact test is preferred for smaller sample sizes. For larger sample sizes (n > 60), the chi-
square test can be used ( Table ). For comparison of paired  samples for categorical variables, the McNemar
test is used. 
For comparison of means between groups for continuous  variables, the following statistical methods are
used. Paired t test is used for comparison of means from 2 paired  samples for normally distributed
continuous parameters. For comparison of means between more than 2  samples for continuous variables,
analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used.
In this vignette, the hospitalist wants to compare the proportion of asthma patients readmitted. This
endpoint is a categorical dichotomous variable (whether readmittted or not). Two unpaired samples will be
compared: discharged with vs discharged without an asthma action plan. Hence, the chi-square test is the
most appropriate test for this study, with its larger sample size.
Su gg ested Reading( s)
The chi-square statistic: Tests for goodness of fit and independence. In: Gravetter FJ, Wallnau LB, eds.
Essentials of Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. 10th ed. Thomson/Wadsworth; 2017:559-602.
Estimating sample size and power: Applications and examples. In: Hulley SB, Cummings SR, Browner
WS, Grady DG, Newman TB, eds. Designing Clinical Research: An Epidemiologic Approach . 4th ed.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013:55-72.
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: chi-square test


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 8 of 10 (Original Question #29)

A new medication has been studied for use in patients with juvenile arthritis. In polyarticular rheumatoid
factor–positive juvenile idiopathic arthritis, it has been shown to reduce the 2-year risk of joint erosion from
30% to 10%. 
Of the following, the NUMBER of patients needed to be treated with this medication to decrease the number
of children with joint erosion by 1 is
A.3
B.5
C.15
D.20

Correct Answer: 5

PREP Pearl(s):
Number needed to treat (NNT) is the number of patients who would need to be treated to prevent the
unwanted outcome. It is calculated as NTT = 1 / absolute risk reduction = 1 / risk  - risk
. 
Relative risk or risk ratio describes the incidence in exposed individuals divided by the incidence in
unexposed individuals. Relative risk helps statisticians understand the magnitude of a risk in
comparison  with a standard.

Critique:
In the study described in the vignette, the absolute risk of joint erosion over 2 years is reduced from 30% to
10%. Absolute risk is a measure of the proportion of the population who will be prevented from developing
an outcome by receiving a treatment. The absolute risk reduction in this study would be 30% − 10% = 20%
absolute risk reduction.
The benefit of an intervention can be expressed as a number needed to treat (NNT). The NNT is the
reciprocal of the absolute risk reduction, or 1/20% = 5. In this study, 5 patients would need to be treated with
this medication to reduce the outcome of joint erosion over 2 years by 1 patient. The NNT is an increasingly
popular expression of absolute benefit or risk because it is relatively intuitive to understand.
Relative risk or risk ratio, on the other hand, describes the incidence in exposed individuals divided by the
incidence in unexposed individuals. The relative risk of joint erosion would be 10% / 30%, or 0.33. Relative risk
helps us understand the magnitude of a risk in comparison  with a standard.
In order to calculate absolute risk reduction or relative risk in a study, the study design needs to calculate
incidence (risk) over time, as is typically seen in randomized control studies or longitudinal cohort studies. 
Su gg ested Reading( s)(exposed)
(unexposed)8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 64/99
Elmore JG, Wild DMG, Nelson HD, Katz DL. Jekel’s Epidemiology, Biostatistics, Preventive Medicine, and
Public Health.  5th ed. Elsevier; 2020: chap 6
Mendes D, Alves C, Batel-Marques F. Number needed to treat (NNT) in clinical literature: an appraisal.
BMC Medicine.  2017;15:112. doi: 10.1186/s12916-017-0875-8 .
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: 5


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 9 of 10 (Original Question #39)

A researcher is reviewing a study on adolescents with celiac disease (CD). The goal of the study is to
determine whether adherence to a gluten-free diet differs based on the method of diagnosis—endoscopic
biopsy or serologic markers alone. The outcome measure is the serum tissue transglutaminase (TTG) level 1
year after diagnosis and initiation of the gluten-free diet. A serum immunoglobulin (Ig) A TTG value of less
than 15 was selected as normal. 
The results of the study show the mean TTG level 1 year after diagnosis and initiation of diet management in
patients with celiac disease:
Biopsy-conﬁrmed (95% conﬁdence interval) Serology-conﬁrmed (95% conﬁdence interval)
TTG 15 U/mL (10-20 U/mL) 30 U/mL (18-42 U/mL)
Of the following, the BEST interpretation of these results is that
A.95% of the subjects with biopsy-confirmed CD had TTG levels between 10 and 20
B.there is 95% certainty that the mean TTG level for serology-confirmed CD in the population
would be between 18 and 42
C.there is 95% likelihood that the TTG levels of biopsy-confirmed and serology-confirmed patients
with CD were significantly different
D.there is a 95% probability that all serology-confirmed CD patients in the population will have TTG
levels between 18 and 42

Correct Answer: there is 95% certainty that the mean TTG level for serology-confirmed CD in the

PREP Pearl(s):
Confidence intervals are routinely set at 90%, 95%, or 99%, indicating the percent certainty that the
true effect (ie, population mean) falls within the interval.
Confidence intervals (CIs) inform the reader about the precision of the estimates. Narrow CIs are
typically seen when the sample size is large, because the standard deviations decrease as the sample
size (n) increases.
Confidence intervals also inform the reader about statistical significance. For differences, a confidence
interval that does not cross zero is significant; for ratios, it matters whether the confidence interval
crosses 1.

Critique:
8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 87/99
The study in the vignette investigated whether children whose celiac disease (CD) was diagnosed with a
biopsy would be more adherent to a gluten-free diet than those diagnosed with serology alone. The metric
used was the serum IgA tissue transglutaminase (TTG) level at one year after initiation of a gluten-free diet.
Two confidence intervals (CIs) are presented in the vignette, one in the serology-confirmed group and one in
the biopsy-confirmed group ( Table ).
Confidence intervals are defined as a range within which a true value (ie, population mean, median, or
proportion) is likely to fall. Confidence intervals estimate a population parameter using observed data from a
study sample of the population. Confidence intervals are routinely set at 90%, 95%, or 99%, indicating the
percent certainty that the true effect values will fall within the interval. Confidence intervals inform the reader
about the precision of the estimates. The narrower the CI, the less variation is present in the sample data and
the more likely the TTG levels of the sample reflect the TTG levels of the population. Narrow CIs are typically
seen when the sample size is large, because the standard error decreases as the sample size (n) increases. In
addition, CIs are affected by sample variability. 
Confidence intervals also inform the reader about statistical significance. In the vignette, the CIs for the 2
groups overlap (ie, 10 to 20 for the biopsy-confirmed group, and 18 to 42 for the serology-confirmed group),
therefore, the difference between the sample means is not statistically significant. 
Confidence intervals can be interpreted several ways. For this vignette, the day-to-day common use
interpretation of a 95% CI would be that the investigator is 95% confident that the mean TTG level at one year
falls from 10 to 20 in the biopsy-confirmed group and from 18 to 42 in the serology-confirmed group.
Similarly, the investigator is also 95% confident that the population mean (ie, actual or true mean of the
population) for each group falls within the respective ranges.
Technically, the 95% CI means that, if the experiment were repeated 100 times with the same sample size
drawn from the same population of interest, the estimated mean (or other measurement) would fall within
this range 95 out of 100 times.
A 95% CI does not indicate that 95% of all values will fall within this range. Similarly, it does not mean that
there is a 95% probability that all values would fall within this range, because it is only an estimate that the
mean would be in this range. 
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Garcia-Perez MA, Alcala-Quintana R. The interpretation of scholars’ interpretations of confidence
intervals: criticism, replication, and extension of Hoekstra et al (2014). Front Psychol.  2016;7:1042.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01042
Hoekstra R, Morey RD, Rouder JN, Wagenmakers EJ. Robust misinterpretation of confidence intervals.
Psychon Bull Rev.  2014;21(5):1157-1164. doi: 10.3758/s13423-013-0572-3
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: there is 95% certainty that the mean TTG level for serology-confirmed CD in the
population would be between 18 and 42


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 10 of 10 (Original Question #37)

A researcher is designing a study on how long it takes Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) IgG-negative pediatric
transplant recipients to convert to EBV IgG-positive status after receiving a kidney from an EBV-positive
donor. There will be 2 groups; one receives a 90-day course of antiviral therapy after transplant and another
receives a 365-day course of antiviral therapy after transplant.
Of the following, the BEST statistical approach is
A.1-way analysis of variance
B.survival analysis 
C.t test
D. χ2 test

Correct Answer: survival analysis

PREP Pearl(s):
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis is a great way to visually depict outcomes over time.
Additional analysis beyond the survival curve is required to determine whether a statistical difference
is present.
It is important to note the number of patients remaining at each observation period, especially to the
right. Large visual differences with small patient numbers often occur at the end of the observation.

Critique:
This research design is looking at a time-to-event occurrence (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV] IgG conversion). The
preferred statistical approach is a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. In this analysis, each patient has 3
characteristics: assigned study group (short-term or long-term antiviral treatment), time of observation, and
status at the end of observation (event occurrence, censored [eg, dropout]). The results can graphically be
displayed as shown in Figure 1 .
The survival analysis curve in Figure 1 shows survival as a stepwise function because survival is not a
continuous outcome (events happen discretely). The size of the steps in the curve can often help depict the
number of patients. In addition, some survival analysis curves list the number of patients remaining at the
end of an observation period. This information is usually listed below the time on the x-axis, which is
especially helpful when few patients make it to the end of the final observation period. It is important that the
censored patients (especially dropouts) are depicted or described. In Figure 1 it is not possible to tell how
many patients dropped out (censored).
There are different types of censoring. Those patients who have no event at the end of observation or who
drop out (death, other event occurrence, or ending participation) without an event are said to be right
censored. Those patients who enroll in a study group but who have an event at an unknown time before the
first observation are said to be left censored (patients who are IgG negative at evaluation and are randomized8/28/25, 11:42 AM Basic PREP Statistics Assessment - Learner Mode: Attempt review | Pediatrics
 83/99
at the time of transplant but have already converted at the first observation after transplant would be left
censored). Interval censoring occurs if the event occurs between 2 successive ascertainments. In this
example, IgG conversions would be expected to occur between successive laboratory samplings, and
procedures for interval censoring would be needed. In Figure 2 , the IgG level is checked every 2 months, and
so a positive conversion at the 4-month check (as shown for interval censoring) occurred between 2 and 4
months and would need to be assigned a time (likely either 4 months or the midpoint between observations,
3 months). For some events (eg, death), the time is typically known precisely.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves can be statistically compared. A log-rank test is commonly performed. At each
observation time point, an χ 2 test is performed for each group, and the log-rank test sums the results. Thus,
in our example, the log-rank test can determine whether there is a statistical difference between short-term
and long-term antiviral therapy. Another way to analyze the survival curve would be the hazard ratio, which
describes relative risk of events. The hazard ratio is for the full survival curve. In our example, it would be the
relative hazard of EBV conversion (short-term vs long-term antiviral therapy) for the period of the study. A
more visual approach to quantify the differences between survival curves is to plot the confidence interval at
each observation point.
The χ 2 is appropriate to use for nominal data. In the example provided, this would be EBV conversion or no
EBV conversion. In our example, if all patients were observed for 2 years after transplant, an χ 2 analysis could
be performed on the rate of EBV conversion with short-term vs long-term antiviral therapy but would be
unable to answer the fundamental question of whether there is a difference in the time to EBV IgG
conversion. In addition, χ 2 analysis does not allow censoring for dropouts. The χ 2 test would be used as part
of the log-rank test or hazard ratio mentioned above to analyze the results of the survival analysis.
The t test is used to compare the mean in one group with the mean in another group and uses continuous
data. In our example, if all the patients were observed for 2 years after transplant and all converted during
the observation, the mean time to EBV IgG conversion with short-term vs long-term antiviral therapy could be
compared using the t test if no censoring was required (all patients converted in study timeframe, no
dropouts, etc).
Similarly, 1-way analysis of variance could deal with continuous data (such as time to EBV IgG conversion) but
does not allow censoring and would not be suitable if anyone dropped out or did not convert. 
Su gg ested Reading( s)
Hess AS, Hess JR. Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Transfusion . 2020;60(4):670-672. doi: 10.1111/trf.15725
Ludbrook J, Royse AG. Analysing clinical studies: principles, practice and pitfalls of Kaplan-Meier plots.
ANZ J Surg.  2008;78(3):204-210. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2007.04405.x
Rich JT, Neely JG, Paniello RC, Voelker CC, Nussenbaum B, Wang EW. A practical guide to understanding
Kaplan-Meier curves. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;143(3):331-336.
doi:10.1016/j.otohns.2010.05.007
Zwiener I, Blettner M, Hommel G. Survival analysis: part 15 of a series on evaluation of scientific
publications. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011;108(10):163-169. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2010.0163
Content D om ain
Statistics
The correct answer is: survival analysis


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
